Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon. Practicing physicist Robert L. Forward is
also a science fiction writer. After writing science fact articles in the
magazines for almost 20 years, Forward recently published his first science
fiction novel, Dragon's Egg. When we asked Forward how he began writing science
fiction, he claimed he was tricked into doing it. But the way I got into
actually writing fiction was Larry Niven tricked me. Here he explains how he
innocently offered to help Larry Niven. Larry Niven and Jerry Pornell were
running a lecture series at UCLA, invited me to come and give a scientific talk
on gravity as part of their series. It was how science fiction and science
interact. And at the close of one of the sessions that Larry was talking on, he
said he wanted to write a story about beings that lived on a neutron star. Frank
Drake had mentioned this idea a number of years before. He said he really wanted
to write that story. And that night at the cocktail party that they threw, I
said, Larry, I'll tell you what I'll do. I will work up all the scientific
details behind the story because I know a lot about neutron star physics. And it
would be a fun story to read, and I'd like to read hard science fiction. And
what I'd like to do is give you enough facts so that you can write a really hard
science fiction story without too many errors in it. When Ford finished his
part, Niven was still busy, so Ford continued the work himself. And so I worked
up all the science and gave him about 25, 30 pages of notes. And he said, gee,
I'm busy right now working with Jerry Pornell on something called Lucifer's
Hammer. And I'm pretty busy. I'll tell you what we'll do. Why don't we just sort
of make this a collaboration. You write the first draft of the story. And then
I'll take it over from there and rewrite the thing because you're not a writer,
and I am. And that way we'll get the best of both worlds. Well, so I went back
and wrote the first draft. And when I came back, he was still busy. And so I
ended up finding out that I wanted to read this story. And the only way I could
read that story was to write it first. So I had to write it. And so Larry Niven
tricked me into getting into science fiction.
But Larry Niven didn't abandon Ford after tricking him into writing a novel. He
advised Ford on many aspects, including a major plot element. Larry Niven
basically gave the thousand to one, I mean, excuse me, the million to one time
difference.
And the main thing that he brought out was the fact that the important part of
the story was not all the science, which would have been my tendency to write,
but the problems of how do you communicate with somebody that lives and dies a
million times faster than you do. And if those beings, since they would be
thinking a million times faster than you, would figure out that you were there
long before you could figure out they were there, and they had to figure out a
way to communicate with you and signal you that they were there before you left.
And so he mentioned the fact that, for instance, somebody on the neutron star
would have to climb a mountain and send a signal. And that might take them many
generations. Actually, in the story, I compressed it into one generation,
basically. But that was the kind of attitude that he brought toward the story
that helped a lot. More on Robert Ford tomorrow.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,
coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon. And David Cruz. In our last show, we learned how Robert
Ford was tricked into writing the manuscript, which evolved into his novel,
Dragon's Egg. Larry Niven helped Ford flesh out his ideas, but it was Lester Del
Rey who helped him polish the manuscript into a novel. My very first draft, of
course, was quite rough from a writing point of view. And when Lester looked at
it, he saw some potential in it, but as it was, as the manuscript was sent to
him, it wasn't acceptable. It wasn't the book. And he sat down and typed up 14
pages, single space of detailed criticism of the manuscript. And those 14 pages,
when I followed them to the letter, and I don't think I disagreed with him on
but, say, one or two things, when I went back through the manuscript and took
his suggestions and then looked at the resultants, it was, you know, it began to
be readable instead of being a, well, a science fact article, I guess. You know,
it had some flow. It had some characterization.
But, you know, it still was a hard science fiction novel. In Dragon's Egg, Ford
takes a hard science approach to a situation in which beings who inhabit a
neutron star learn of the humans who are orbiting their star, then establish
communications with them. The task is made difficult, though, by the fact that
the aliens live at a pace roughly a million times faster than that of humans.
Thus, an individual alien, or chela, lives out its entire life in several human
minutes. The chela, being native to a neutron star, with its intense
gravitational and magnetic fields and extremely dense matter, are certainly
constructed different from humans. Here, Ford tells us about the aliens, their
environment, and their names. Once I had placed my imagination and myself on the
surface of the neutron star, now, once I knew the territory well enough and
appreciated the fact that the light on this star comes from below, not above, so
if the sky is black, there's no light coming out of it except the two stars,
everything is aglow from below, and the territory is very flat because of the
terrific gravity, I began to sort of appreciate what it was like there. And what
I basically did was take the Indian technique of naming children about things
that occurred shortly after they were born and applied it to the chela, but put
in a hyphen, so it would take out the Indian context, and also, of course, a lot
of the Indian things like eagles and feathers and sky and things like that don't
exist, so I had to do that transfer. The chela's social structure differs from
ours as well, though there are some similarities. Soon I began to realize that
in my dreaming up of these creatures, I had ended up with a social structure
that was sort of halfway between a Scottish clan and an Indian tribe, and as if
both the Indians and the Scottish were crocodiles that laid eggs instead of
having the problems of mammals that they have to take care of their young. The
young are immediately viable in crocodiles and turtles, and so are the little
tiny chela. So what I tried to do was imagine what it would be like if instead
of monkeys developing intelligent social interactions, crocodiles developed
intelligent social interactions.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Modesto Return梵
and in partnership with I been involved in
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Cruz and Bill Vernon. Although science fiction is a literature
ostensibly about science, the effects of technology, or a future where science
is very much present, or in some cases very much absent, it is mainly written by
non-scientists. Some writers do have undergraduate degrees in the sciences. Paul
Anderson, Arthur C. Clarke, Joe Haldeman, and Charles Harness, to name a few.
And certainly most other writers have had some coursework in the sciences. But
there are a few scientists who write science fiction. Practicing scientists who
write it include Gregory Benford, Joan Slanzuski, Fred Hoyle, David Brin, and
Tony Rothman, and a notable ex-scientist, Isaac Asimov. Another practicing
scientist who writes science fiction is physicist Robert Ford, whose novel
Dragon's Egg we have discussed previously. We asked Ford what enjoyment he reaps
from being a scientist and writing science fiction. Writing is a process of
selling science. I mean, I have always felt that part of my job as a scientist
was to try and communicate, first, the facts of science, and second, the
excitement of science, science, to the general public that is not involved in
science. Because science is at the cutting edge of our intellectual
achievements, whether it's physical sciences, chemical sciences, biological or
social or whatever sciences. This is where we're developing as an intelligent
being. And we're learning more about the world around us and how we operate in
that world. And it's very exciting to be involved in that. And you don't get
many scientists admitting that it's exciting, but it is. I mean, it's part of
the reasons you get professors working at wages less than they would if they
were a plumber, is it's more fun to be a scientist. But most of them are so
hidebound and so concerned about their image that they don't want to admit that
they're having fun. Well, I admit I'm having fun being a scientist. And I think
it's fun. I think that fun and the excitement and everything else can be
communicated to the general public so that their awareness of the fact that
they're part of an intellectual and evolutionary advance as an intelligent being
can be given to them. And I think that's one of the reasons why we have such a
spurt of magazines today like Omni and Science 80 and the Smithsonian and others
that have, and Discovery. All of these magazines are beginning to realize that
people want to be part of the leading edge of our cultural evolution. And I
found that I have the ability to communicate that. Now, for many years, I would
only write science articles, not fiction. I wouldn't have a story. I'd just say,
here's something interesting I found at the outskirts of science, and isn't it
wonderful and isn't it great? And I'd write it down to whatever level was there.
And those were science speculation articles that I've sold in Analog and Omni
and places like that. And I'm finding that doing it in the form of fiction
reaches more people.
Although Ford is becoming better known in the science fiction community because
of Dragon's Egg, he has been in the field for many years writing science fact
articles for the science fiction magazines. Certainly, science fiction benefits
when people with not only the scientific background, but the enthusiasm of
Robert Ford contribute to it.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
Thank you.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and David Carson. One of the most unique of all science
fiction novels is Norman Spinrad's The Iron Dream. Though Spinrad did indeed
write the book, he presents it as if it were written by Adolf Hitler. Spinrad
bases the book on a provocative supposition. Suppose Hitler, instead of leading
the Nazi party to power in Germany, had come to this country and become a
science fiction writer. What kind of books would he have written? The Iron Dream
is Spinrad's answer to that question. He wrote the book exactly as he believes
Hitler would have. Spinrad says it was a difficult book to write. Because in
order to write that book, I had to write like Hitler. And in order to get to
that point, I had to read everything that Hitler had written, which is very
boring indeed. And I had to also write a book called Hitler's Dinner
Conversations. It was like 800 pages of Hitler's babblings at the dinner table,
which was taken out of short end by Martin Borman, a fascinating book. But in
order to write the bulk of that book, Hitler's novel inside the book, I had to
write like Hitler. I had to get inside Hitler's head. That was not what I could
consider a fun experience. And so it was a very difficult book to write. Kind of
a shattering book to write because of the kind of position I put myself in.
Also, of course, Hitler was a terrible writer. So in order to be accurate, I
really had to write something awful in a way. And I was trying to, you know...
Also, Hitler was getting crazier and crazier as he was writing the book. So I
got crazier and crazier as I was writing the book.
Hitler's main character is Farrick Jagger, a sword and sorcery type hero. Jagger
fights to preserve the racial purity of humanity against hordes of genetically
inferior mutants. And in every way, Spinrad tries to create a novel a pulp
science fiction writer with Hitler's political and racial views and writing
skills would have produced. The book, of course, is a classic anti-fascist
novel. We asked Spinrad if anyone had ever completely misunderstood it and
thought he was admiring Hitler. No, the only kind of misunderstanding that I
read in a review that I really got was a little bit different. It was somebody
who said, well, this is really all good fun, you know, I really enjoyed this
book. Why did he have to muck it up with all this stuff about Hitler and all the
extraneous paraphernalia? It was just a good, you know, rousing adventure tale.
That is the only kind of misreading of the book that's really taken place.
Actually, I have not been called a Nazi or a fascist by anyone that I know of in
connection with that book.
Spinrad explains where the idea for such a unique experiment came from. Well,
the impetus came from a conversation with Mike Wilcock in London where I was
living at the time about how he wrote Sword and Sorcery and how he used Freudian
imagery and, you know, the basic appeal of Sword and Sorcery and that gave me
the idea that if Hitler had not, you know, become Fuhrer of Germany, he could
have as well winded up writing Sword and Sorcery. And I've always been, you
know, fascinated with the whole question of how a thing like Nazism could really
happen. And none of the stuff I had read about that really satisfied me, you
know, political or economic or conventional explanations of how this happened.
And the two things came together and, you know, my insight about Nazism was that
it was a psychosexual phenomenon and that Hitler came to power by, in effect,
manipulating imagery and psychosexual substructures rather than by a coherent
economic program and so forth. And so that was the basic, and then, you know,
this had a certain correlation with a certain kind of sword and sorcery and that
was the basic impetus that generated the book. The Iron Dream was published in
1972. It won the pre-Apollo Award in France and was recently reissued in this
country by Timescape Books. And when it was first published in Germany not too
long ago, it was banned. We'll have that story next time.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Iron Dream is
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association, of the
Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and
fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is David Carson. And Daryl Lane. Early in 1982, Norman Spinrad's science
fiction novel, The Iron Dream, was totally banned in Germany. As we explained
last time, the book is an anti-fascist novel. Though Spinrad pretends the book
was written by Adolf Hitler, it is actually a brilliant criticism of the
political and racial views held by Hitler. Spinrad says the book has been well
received in all the countries where it's been published. This book has been
published now in the United States, Britain, France, Japan, Spain, Portugal,
Argentina, Italy, I forget where else, about eight different countries. It's
been published in the other two Axis powers. It's been published in Argentina.
And it's been extensively reviewed in about eight different countries. I have no
instance where the book was misunderstood and was taken as anything but an anti
-Nazi and anti-fascist novel
throughout the world. The German censors cited the book's danger to young people
as one reason it was banned. We asked Spinrad if anyone could possibly
misunderstand his intentions in The Iron Dream. Well, any, I mean, you know, you
know, you know, you know, Hinkley certainly misunderstood saying taxi drivers,
so there's always schizophrenics and maniacs around who can misunderstand
anything. I mean, you know, David Horowitz heard demons in his head. I mean,
there are always completely crazy people who can read things out of something
that were never in there. So I'd be one or two people around, you know,
psychotics who could get anything out of any book. But I don't, I, see, the book
is written on two levels. The sophisticated readers, they understand what it is
to begin with. But the other level is that the kind of people who are into
things like Perry Rodin and that kind of proto-fascist science fantasy would
start off reading the book, maybe identifying with Ferrick Jagger, you know, a
third of the way into it or something, and suddenly realizing what it is they're
identifying with. And so it becomes a kind of deprogramming experience for the
kind of people that they claim would be harmed. I think it would be a very
strongly anti-Nazi book precisely for those kinds of young people who might have
leanings in that direction because they would then be confronted with what it is
that they're really identifying with. We also asked Spinrad what his reaction to
the ban was. My reaction to the ban is very complicated. First of all, it took
ten years to get this book published in Germany. All my French friends said it
would never be published in Germany. So when Heine Berlach, you know, summoned
up the courage to publish it, I was very pleased, and I thought that this was
going to, you know, that this represented a kind of maturity on the part of
Germany, that they're willing to look at this stuff. And I felt very good about
it being published there, and I was a bit surprised. Now that it's banned,
obviously I feel that, well, the book says it all. The book itself, in a way, is
about why it was banned, because it's the same sort of mentality that goes
around banning books that resulted in a different kind of way, in the Third
Reich. That's not to say that all Germans are like this, because the publisher
has fought this all the way and is continuing to fight it. Most of the German
newspapers, there's been a lot of coverage, has supported the book against the
ban. The German chapter of World SF had a vote and issued a public statement
against the ban in supporting the book.
So, you know, I think it's a very retrogressive thing, and it says something
about, I suppose, the German political and social system, is that they do not
understand the concept that is embodied in the First Amendment to the
Constitution of the United States. And it's a particularly pernicious law,
because anything can be banned under this law under the grounds that it's not
fit for children, even if it's not intended for children, which is exactly the
kind of thing that the moral majority is trying to do here, which tells you what
kind of people they are, too.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin
Science Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in
Odessa, Texas.
The Science Fiction Radio Show,